first of all i'd like to say thank you
for having the courage to pursue the
truth and i'm very proud that you're
canadian especially since
truth has been so fraught lately in
fabian politics
my question is what would you say to
someone
who has been through a traumatic
experience and wants to avoid the
culture of victimhood that encourages
people to identify with their trauma and
capitalize off of being the most
victimized person
okay well there's two things that i
address there people say this courage
they say they talk to me about my
courage fairly frequently and that's not
right exactly
like i just learned to be afraid of the
right thing
and i really mean that i mean i saw
an endless repetition in my clinical
practice and in my own private life when
my eyes were open
the consequences of not saying what was
true
it's like whatever hell you might fall
into by opening your mouth when you have
something to say that isn't popular it's
nothing like the hell that you're going
to envelop yourself in if you lose
control of your own tongue and mind
and i like i said in my clinical
practice i never saw anyone get away
with anything even once
and so all you have in a situation like
that is what is the truth now you know
of course you only have your
approximations to the truth but that's
better than nothing and so you need to
be afraid of the right thing and you
should be afraid of contaminating your
soul with deceit that's what you should
be afraid of that will definitely do you
in and i know exactly how what happens
is
you know garbage in garbage out the old
programmer's saying goes and so you'll
fill your head with nonsense and no one
will call you on it except you but you
can steal that voice if you try hard
enough
you just wait until you get in real
trouble
you know one day there'll come a point
where you have to make a decision
and the decision is the difference
between life and death or worse between
someone else's life and death or worse
between health and the suffering that's
worse than death
and because you've compromised yourself
to such a degree you will not be able to
rely on your judgment and you will make
the mistake you shouldn't make
and then you're done and that will
absolutely happen
so you tell mistruths
voluntarily at your exceptional peril
and you avoid the unpleasant truths that
you might have to delve into in all
their messiness at your absolute peril
and the peril of everyone around you and
so if you see that
you become afraid of that that's hell
and
hell is worse than death
so and i mean that most sincerely
so okay and so that's the courage issue
and then you asked about sorry i'm sorry
i
obliterated the last part of your
question
traumatic experience and wants to avoid
the culture of victimhood
um
the first the first thing is
well if you want to avoid that you're
sort of on the right path already right
because you have some vision of what it
might be like not to be traumatized to
not be a victim well first of all i mean
in some sense
there's no shortage of victimhood i mean
you know the existential psychotherapist
in the 50s taking a page from heidegger
talked about thrown-ness right the
arbitrary nature of our existence i mean
here you are you you have the ethnicity
and race that was bestowed upon you you
had no choice in that you're
the victim and the beneficiary of this
particular historical moment you know
you and you're the victim and
beneficiary of all the atrocity and the
wonders of the past you deal with your
own emotions you deal with the fact of
this specific time and place all of that
and there is a sense of
well there's a sense of mortality
certainly that's associated that with
finitude and mortality and you can
easily say in some sense that we're all
victimized deeply by our own
susceptibility to vulnerability and
tragedy
and i think that's true but
but then the question is well
what's the best way of dealing with that
and
falling prey to it
when my daughter was young she was very
ill
and one of the things we told her
repeatedly and which i think she did
very well to her credit was
often she was too ill really to be able
to go to school because she couldn't
wake up in the morning and she was in
pain and but she needed to go to school
and well one of the things we told her
was
don't use your illness as an excuse
right because you're already in trouble
kit you know you got your problems and
it they're serious but if you can hold
on to the distinction between the part
of you that can in spite of this and the
part that can't because of it and not
blur that distinction then that's one
more thing you have on your side while
you're attempting to struggle through
this and to her credit
she managed that and quite pristinely
and that was extraordinarily helpful it
was very difficult at times
after she had had her hip replaced
she she couldn't get around that well
and so we decided to put her in a
motorcycle course which was rather
terrifying thing to do since she just
had a hip replacement but she needed to
have a scooter to get around and so she
went with her mother to this motorcycle
uh course and they were driving
motorcycles not scooters
and at one point one of the people who
was being trained wiped out on the
motorcycle and you know it was rather
traumatic let's say
and uh
she woke up the next day and was too
afraid to go to the course
and so we said well you know it's
understandable why don't you just get in
the car and go to the course and see
when you get there if you can manage it
and she got herself out of bed and went
and managed it and then she passed the
course and then she had a scooter and
could zoom around the city for the next
couple of years and so that was really
good but it was it was very hard to draw
that line right because
in some sense she'd been victimized by
this arbitrary illness and you know you
you tend as a parent to have an
outpouring of empathy the empathy that
can destroy under those circumstances
because you you cuddle the person
more than is absolutely necessary right
and you have every reason to because
they're suffering like mad
but
you want to be a victim and be a tragic
figure
you know and you might say yes but you
wouldn't if you thought it through
so
and then if someone asked me that
question say in a clinical setting i
would do a little analysis of it's like
okay well you're suffering from this
traumatic experience you want to get
over it we'd have to figure out what the
practical steps might be and that might
be finding somebody to talk to or
there's other ways of dealing with it
but you delve into the practical realm
to sort of address that
so
thank you so much for your talk
on a couple of occasions you
mentioned judeo-christian values
during the talking in the recent
question you
talked of the english common law which
sort of alludes to the divine
one in
every six people in the world live in
india today
india has a democratic secular
constitution
and yet the culture is vedic
and
caste is central
to society
how would you speak
about the freedom of speech into a
culture
that has that in its faith and beliefs
and at the same time in certain fringes
of
the political movement
certain radical ideological movements
there's a belief that
these freedoms are a western
import
so how would you healthily
speak into that culture
about upholding the freedoms well the
first thing i would want to do if i was
doing that practically speaking is i
would like to talk to as many people who
hold those particular views as i
possibly could to find out why they
think the way they think
you know when they say that it's a
western import well what do they mean
because in some sense it is a western
import i mean india has a body of laws
that at least in part is derived from
the english common law tradition and so
it was
imposed upon or introduced into that
culture now it took
to a large degree and i don't believe
that you can import a propositional
structure without the underlying
imagistic ethos and behavioral
proclivity it just won't work right
because the infrastructure so to speak
isn't there
and so
the fact that it has worked at least to
some well i would say some remarkable
degree because india is really a
remarkable success story indicates that
there is some correspondence between the
english common law tradition which
emerged
gradually and in some sense
incrementally and organically out of the
will of the english population
and it matches the same strivings and
proclivities that you might find
elsewhere i would also say that the the
relatively radical comparative economic
success of states settled by
england in its in its history of
colonization let's say also points to a
decent fit between the english common
law tradition and a whole variety of
other cultures now that doesn't mean the
match is perfect and so to some degree
the argument is correct it's imposed at
least as a set of propositions but it's
incorrect because i think it reflects
something that's fundamental at the
level we've been discussing today
but if i was trying to mediate those
disputes and i've been having increasing
numbers of conversations with people on
the islamic side of the world trying to
do exactly that is the first thing i
want to do is listen a lot because i
don't know what
i'm so ignorant about such things i just
don't know what people actually think
and so you can't begin to address a
question like that till you find out why
those who stand in opposition to your
claims let's say why they think the way
they think now the probability that
there's no tradition
say within indian families that
approximates free speech and flourishing
families it's like that's zero
because
it's not possible you know and if it's
just a tyranny let's if it's a tyranny
well
tyrannies aren't sustainable
chimps can't even sustain tyrannies you
know and i'm saying that for technical
reasons you know because there is this
idea that's quite promoted that
complex animals like chimpanzees live in
dominance hierarchies and it's the
meanest toughest male chimp that rules
the hierarchy right and he's like stalin
except in chimp form which actually
places them somewhat higher on the
evolutionary scale than stalin and so
but franz dewall has investigated the
structure of those societies in great
detail and it's simply not the case that
the most tyrannical chimp is on top in
fact the chimp males who sustain
leadership across reasonable amounts of
time are unbelievably reciprocal in
their interactions especially with other
males but they're also particularly
attentive to the females and the infants
and part of the reason for that is well
let's say you're you know joe brute
chimp and you're strutting around like a
fullback and in georgia constantly
showing off your physical prowess it's
like well one day you're a little sick
or a little tired and two chimps that
you've tyrannized will tear you into
pieces
and that happens quite frequently in
chimpanzee disputes where a two
tyrannical male will be literally torn
to pieces because chimps are very brutal
when they get their mind to it and
they're just taken out
and so
this this there's a principle of
reciprocal altruism let's say that's
associated with the free exchange of
ideas and something like
mutual valuation that's recognition of
the soul i would say on a metaphysical
level that's a precondition for peace
everywhere not just in the west and
that's been propositionalized and
formalized into law in different ways in
different cultures and sometimes
not formalized so much yet let's say
because
many cultures are governed primarily by
ritual and custom rather than you know a
fully articulated body of laws
but the fact that that does not mean by
any stretch the imagination that english
common law is somehow purely arbitrary
social construction it's like that
that's such a it's a preposterous claim
so
i would start by listening and find out
exactly what the issues are and then
well then proceed from there
you